thank you
okay David you've spent the last six or
seven years I believe working on this
radical proposal for the reformulation
of fundamental physics in terms of
something that you call constructive
theory
so I'd like to know what on Earth
constructive theory is and how you got
started thinking about it the way it
began was uh actually
significantly different from the way we
think about it now okay I had been
working on the quantum theory of
computation and information and and at
the time I thought of that as like the
fundamental Theory underlying all
physics in a sense because the universal
quantum computer
can simulate the behavior of any other
physical system and therefore in a sense
the whole of physics the behavior of all
physical systems is just the study of
that is the same as the study of the
programs of a universal quantum computer
huh uh but then I realized that that was
actually inadequate that actually uh
quantum theory of computation isn't
doesn't underlie everything because
when you want to
study the behavior of a particular
physical system and particular physical
laws that that system obeys you have to
know which quantum computer program
corresponds to that and that's it that
that theory of which which is which a
kind of occur that's what really
corresponds to the whole of physics okay
okay so I set about uh trying to extend
the the quantum theory of computation in
a way which would which would Encompass
that as well
but the more I did that the more I
realized that the conventional way of
understanding computation
and physics
was inadequate to this to this uh task
the the conventional way being that you
have initial conditions which for a
computer corresponds to that program and
you have Laws of Motion which in a
computer corresponds to the elementary
operations by which the computer works
and then between those they tell you
what happens at all times but
um that wasn't adequate to describe
simple things like information
in more general terms than in the
quantum theory of computation
so then I gradually realized that you um
what's needed is just a new approach to
fundamental physics as well as to
fundamental computation
and the idea there is that instead of
having initial conditions and laws of
motion which then tell you everything
which everything that happens
instead you you step back a bit and you
have a theory of what can and can't
happen what's possible and impossible
and what actually happens is then just
an emergent property of what can and
can't happen and that's Constructor
Theory
foreign
okay so one of the motivations for
constructive theory is that it enables
you to bring these things like
computation and life and information and
thermodynamics into fundamental physics
and I wonder if you could talk a bit
more about those areas and how they end
up in your picture some of these
emergent things are are are emergent and
inexact in fundamental physics not
because they are in nature but because
fundamental physics can't deal with them
intrinsically can't deal with them
exactly right and are ironically or
appropriately depending on which way you
look at it computation itself is one of
those things because
to define a universal computer which is
at the center of any kind of computation
Theory you can't Define it by just what
it does what what it does in in fact in
reality because Universal refers to all
the things it could do right and the
theory of computation
is basically the delineation of the
difference between the things it can do
could do and the things that it couldn't
possibly do the the non-computable
functions the okay the the undecidable
problems that and that uh partition with
the benefit of hindsight is is uh
Central to the theory of computation as
well including Quantum computation but
it wasn't thought to be Central to
physics so that's one of the things that
we're taking over from computation to
physics the idea that that what really
matters is the distinct for
understanding a physical system is
understanding what it can't can and
can't be made to do
not just what it can and can't do but it
can and can't be made to do right
um and and what it actually does is kind
of contingent that that's not as
important it's an emergent property it's
the other way around from the way
physics is normally construed okay so if
I understand you correctly
um in theories of computation
um you work from kind of a few axioms
about the kinds of things computers can
do through to proofs of what programs
are possible or impossible yes
um and that's really what you're trying
to extend to physical reality you have
that's why constructive theory is a
theory of principles from which you
derive the rest do I have that correct
that's exactly right okay great
there's a famous quotation by by the
physicist Eddington crew said that the
laws of thermodynamics especially the
second law
um are more fundamental than anything
else in physics he said you know if your
theory violates the law conservation of
energy or whatever then then you will
say so much the worse for the law of
conservation and energy but if it
violates the second order and Dynamics
then there's nothing left to do but for
you to withdraw in shame something like
that okay
some sense the the
thermodynamic laws are are deemed to be
more fundamental but in another sense in
in the in the sense of the way that
theories in physics have been built up
it's not only is it not fundamental but
it can't belong to fundamental physics
at all it is deemed to be inherently
approximative inherently emergent and uh
to the extent that the moment you
describe a system exactly in other words
according to the laws of physics
according to its laws of motion you lose
the opportunity to describe
thermodynamics on that system okay now
this is an artifact of the initial
conditions plus Laws of Motion
conception of physics and it just goes
away in constructive theory and Chiara
maletto has has reduced a very nice
um foundational theory of thermodynamics
uh based on on
um an old theory of character Dory
which again no one knew how to
incorporate into fundamental physics but
everyone was saying oh yeah this has got
to be the way to go but they didn't know
how and I think that she has managed to
do it okay and it's because of this
simple different apparently simple
difference between how constructive
theory views the foundations and how the
prevailing conception views them okay
but I I'm always baffled by
um the the motivation for that because
what if it's just the case that
thermodynamics is an emergent phenomena
and what evidence base do we have that
you know requires moving it into
fundamental physics well all science is
conjectural it could turn out that
thermodynamics isn't fundamental it
could turn out the Constructor theory is
false
uh but we have these Clues like I said
that Eddington conception and and and
also the fact that there are various
Clues from different parts of physics
that that strongly suggests that
thermodynamics is a fundamental part of
nature uh one of them is black hole
physics
um Stephen Hawking and before him uh
Jacob beckenstein
uh showed that a black hole has
thermodynamic properties such as entropy
at which uh the black hole entropy
however is an exact property of the
black hole it's it's equal to uh just
basically a constant times the mass of
the black hole and and this entropy uh
can appear in thermodynamic equations
along with normal entropy and yet the
normal entropy is approximative and the
black hole entropy is exact so it's not
so some people say it's not really
entropy it's just pseudoentropy but
right but the thing is that the thing
that has to increase is the sum of the
black hole entry and the normal entropy
not just the normal entropy okay so it
really fits into the laws of
thermodynamics in an integral way so
that that's another clue I mean again
this could be an anomaly that's
explained in dozens of different ways uh
somebody could come up with a different
Theory could say that the black holes
don't have real entropy or you know a
million different ways but it's
suggestive and like like all motivations
for theories that they are not proofs
they're not even proofs that the theory
is needed or that a theory is needed but
they are starting points for a research
program right and when you find that
there are several different ones of
these motivations leading to the same
conclusion and that conclusion is simple
then you know you're you're led into
studying it
fair enough fair enough
I got another such motivation has to do
with the the limitations of what at
least Nolan caused a Newtonian Paradigm
are you aware of that phrasing no
um well he says that
um and you say too I think that
um when you analyze the universe in
terms of initial conditions and laws of
motion
that um rules out explaining what the
initial conditions were because you
can't explain the initial conditions in
terms of a model which includes the
necessity of initial yes
um and construction Theory might be able
to do that you believe oh yes well uh
constructed if constructive theory works
it will have to do that okay uh because
uh when I said that um
uh what actually happens will it will
emerge as an emergent property uh that
includes the initial conditions so
Constructor theory is based on the this
dichotomy between tasks that are
possible and tasks that are impossible
such as
the possible ones might be it might
include the the building of a of a
universal computer and the impossible
ones would include the building of a
perpetual motion machine of the first
kind or the second kind okay okay but
now if we focus on possible on the
possible ones a task being possible
means that they're they're that building
Constructor to perform the task is
possible
which means that there must be raw
materials suitable for building such a
Constructor which means that the initial
conditions of the universe must be such
as to provide such raw materials not
just
once but generically because possible
and impossible have to be Universal
Concepts so generically we have hydrogen
on protons and so on and it must be
possible to get from that to whatever we
whatever the theory says is possible
okay so therefore if Constructor theory
is to be self-consistent as a universal
theory of physics it has to explain
initial conditions or albeit only
emergently like it will describe Laws of
Motion in urgently huh okay I think I
get it
I've gotten quite comfortable thinking
about an emergent phenomena
um not being part of fundamental physics
so there's a part of me that kind of
resists this picture your your painting
and one of your motivations for
constructive theory is bringing
something like causation or possibility
into fundamental physics and the way I
tend to think about causation and the
reason that causation tends to just
appear everywhere in the special
Sciences but not in the fundamental
picture necessarily
is that
human beings are kind of extended
objects in space-time with memories and
we get to watch the way the universe
behaves over time and we develop a
concept of counterfactuals right because
what we see well when when the bird is
it's not clapping its wings it's on the
floor when it is clapping it Wings it
flies
um and
I suspect that
this is just a function of human
psychology the reason that the causes
don't appear in fundamental physics is
that
um you just have the initial conditions
and the laws of emotion and you generate
the block Universe by cracking the
algorithm forward
um or backwards or backwards both ways
from from this present moment right
right which is Virgin Russell's worry
about why causation was was was a goner
as far as physics and philosophy was
concerned
um so have I made my point do you sort
of see what I'm grasping at that's the
causation might just be visible to
humans because of their Vantage Point as
kind of temporarily extended scenes with
memories who see things going one way or
another and and therefore develop an
idea of the counterfactual and that it
might not be necessary to put it in the
fundamental picture yeah
um
I I think you're worrying unnecessarily
um first of all uh it's not the project
of constructive theory to bring emergent
quantities into fundamental physics okay
and in any case it doesn't seem to be on
the horizon that all of them will be um
it's just certain ones right and those
certain ones
in most cases have already been
problematic within fundamental physics
okay so for example you said we're
extended objects we involve vast numbers
of atoms and and uh therefore we were
interested in large-scale regularities
which which are approximate
um well yes but a computer is also one
of those
and the fact that say the Turing
principle uh that that a single machine
can simulate every other machine is a
drastic limitation on what the laws of
physics can be or to put that another
way it is a principle of physics okay
and yet it's talks about computers which
cannot be fundamental objects they are
always extended objects so that unless
we're going to throw away this insight
about which unifies the whole of physics
we've got to allow the Turing principle
to be fundamental okay
if it's fundamental it should be
integrated with the other laws of
physics and at the moment it can't be uh
good I'm glad you said that because it
reminded me of something else I wanted
to ask which is that
um why are only some emergent macro
phenomena insights into fundamental
physics and why why my others like I
want to know why our having this
conversation in this room isn't
something by which we would have to kind
of constrain what the initial
um positions of the universe are or like
why is my scratching my nose not a clue
into into well it's in the way that the
existence of a computer is the simple
answer is that in those cases scratching
the nose sort of case yeah yeah our our
basic explanations say that it's not
happening in other branches of the
universal wave function okay whereas the
universal content computer is a thing
that describes the whole of the
universal wave function so it's it's
inescapable in that sense so that's one
thing I mean there is still such a thing
as contingent facts and necessary facts
the necessary facts are being the ones
that figure in Universal explanations
we don't expect Universal explanations
to explain everything
not not even everything at an atomic
level and and certainly not everything
at an emergent level
I gather you uh hopeful maybe you still
are that's Constructor Theory uh will
provide a key to understanding something
like free will do you still believe that
and if so how would it do that there's a
whole
um cluster of emergent Properties or
even philosophical properties
of
matter and of people and and uh and of
the way things are yeah that kind of go
together
uh free will uh Consciousness knowledge
and now Constructor theory has got a
strong handle on some of those right
and looks as though it might extend to
the others so in in that counter factors
of course constructive theory is
completely based on counter factuals
right so counterfactuals become almost
the foundations of everything
um and so explaining that explain the
counterfactuals itself would be down to
the next Theory which will explain
constructive theory however those other
things like since we have such a
powerful theory of information now for
example within Constructor Theory
it seems uh and and thermodynamics and
so on it it seems that knowledge could
be the next thing
and if knowledge then why not free will
if knowledge entry will why not
Consciousness if those why not
artificial general intelligence right
right so one can hope
that's fantastic
um one of the things I've talked to
Chiara about a couple of years ago was
was with Dan Dennis take on free will
like are you aware of his his positions
yes I I think he's uh tied down by the
prevailing conception of fundamental
physics right initial conditions plus
laws of motion that leaves not much room
for for these
um
philosophical and emergent things see
those things have that intrinsic
difficulty of explaining what they are
how they work and that kind of thing but
there's an additional difficulty caused
by fundamental physics and if you insist
on that at least we know that they're
going to have to conform to this
fundamental physics Inception then uh
you're drastically Limited in what kind
of a theory of those things you can form
yes yes and in in particular I think it
really limits you to reductionist
theories of those things uh whereas if
Constructor theory is the fundamental
Theory you're not limited in that way
and you don't have to arrive at any of
these conclusions like the you know that
the self doesn't exist or you know that
kind of thing it may not may or may not
exist it may be one of these emergent
things that isn't fundamental uh or or
it may be an illusion or not exist but
but on the other hand there's no reason
to if other aspects of the problem seem
to indicate that that Free Will is
connected with counterfactuals and so on
that then there's no problem fundamental
problem with accommodating that within
fundamental physics if that's
constructive theory